Most of libav.js's API is libav's API, and for such functions, you can consult
FFmpeg's documentation. Not every function is exposed, of course; see funcs.json
for a list of exposed functions or to add new functions.

Functions that use double-pointers are exposed as `_js` metafunctions that
return single pointers.

The following additional functionality is provided by libav.js itself, divided
here by the libav component it belongs to. Please read `libav.types.in.d.ts` for
type declarations.


# AVFormat 

## Muxing

### `ff_init_muxer`
```
ff_init_muxer(
    opts: {
        oformat?: number,
        format_name?: string,
        filename?: string,
        device?: boolean,
        open?: boolean
    },
    streamCtxs: [number, number, number][]
): Promise<[number, number, number, number[]]>
```

Initializes a muxer all at once, opening the file and initializing the format
context. You can provide the format as a libav numerical code (`oformat`) or as
a name (`format_name`), the filename to write to (which can of course be a
device) (`filename`), and/or create it as a writer device automatically
(`device`). You have the option not to open the file (`open=false`), in which
case you will need to provide your own `pb`.

For the streams to mux, each stream is in the form `[number, number, number]`,
consisting of the codec context, `time_base_num`, and `time_base_den`,
respectively.

Returns `[output context (oc), format, writer context (pb), stream contexts]`.
Usually called as `[oc, fmt, pb] = await ff_init_muxer(...)`.


### `ff_write_multi`
```
ff_write_multi(
    oc: number, pkt: number, inPackets: Packet[], interleave?: boolean
): Promise<void>
```

Write packets to an output context. You need to not just provide the packet(s)
in libav.js format (`inPackets`), but allocate space for packets in libav
format, so there's somewhere to write them to temporarily (`pkt`). Use
`av_packet_alloc` (and eventually, `av_packet_free`) for that, or get it from
one of the AVCodec metafunctions. `interleave` is fairly format-specific, but
can usually be ignored.


### `ff_free_muxer`
```
ff_free_muxer(oc: number, pb: number): Promise<void>
```

Frees the context generated by `ff_init_muxer`.


## Demuxing

### `ff_init_demuxer_file`
```
ff_init_demuxer_file(
    filename: string, fmt?: string
): Promise<[number, Stream[]]>
```

Initializes a demuxer from the given filename, which can be a reader device.
Optionally takes the expected format as a string.

Returns `[format context (fmt_ctx), streams]`. Streams are of the `Stream` type.

Note that there's no equivalent of `ff_free_muxer`, because
`ff_init_demuxer_file` only initializes one libav object. Free `fmt_ctx` with
`avformat_close_input_js`.


### `ff_read_multi`
```
ff_read_multi(
    fmt_ctx: number, pkt: number, devfile?: string, opts?: {
        limit?: number, // OUTPUT limit, in bytes
        devLimit?: number // INPUT limit, in bytes (don't read if less than this much data is available)
    }
): Promise<[number, Record<number, Packet[]>]>
```

Read some packets from a format context. Like `ff_write_multi`, you must provide
`pkt`.

By default, this will read as much as it can, which is typically the entire
file. If using a device in this default mode, you will need to feed it data, and
won't get anything back until it's done.

To limit how much data is sent, either use `limit`, or use `devfile` and
`devLimit` (`devfile` is not part of `opts` for historical reasons). `limit`
limits how much data `ff_read_multi` outputs to one packet more than the number
of bytes you request. If you set `devfile` and `devLimit`, then it only reads
until the device file is down to `devLimit` bytes. Note that to use `opts`
without `devfile`, you must set `devfile` to `null`; you cannot skip it.

Returns `[result, packets]`. The result is the result code from the underlying
read; `0` is success, but you can also expect `-libav.EAGAIN` (if you hit a
limit) or `libav.AVERROR_EOF` (at the end of the file).

The returned packets are in a record indexed by the stream index. Those indices
are the indices of the `Stream` objects in the `Stream[]` array given by
`ff_init_demuxer_file`.


## Data manipulation

### `ff_copyout_packet`
```
ff_copyout_packet(pkt: number): Promise<Packet>
```

Copy a packet from internal libav memory (`pkt`) as a libav.js object.


### `ff_copyin_packet`
```
ff_copyin_packet(pktPtr: number, packet: Packet): Promise<void>
```

Copy a packet as a libav.js object (`packet`) into libav memory (`pktPtr`).


# AVCodec

## Encoding

### `ff_init_encoder`
```
ff_init_encoder(
    name: string, opts?: {
        ctx?: AVCodecContextProps, options?: Record<string, string>
    }
): Promise<[number, number, number, number, number]>
```

Allocate and initialize an encoder (whether audio or video). Sometimes, all that
is sufficient is the name, in libav style, e.g. `libopus` or `aac`. Common
features like bitrate are in `ctx` (see the description of `AVCodecContextProps`
in libav.types.in.d.ts). `options` is for codec-specific options.

Returns a *lot* of things, some of which aren't always needed: `[codec, codec
context (c), frame, packet (pkt), frame size]`. Usually called as `[, c, frame,
pkt, frame_size] = await ff_init_encoder(...)`.


### `ff_encode_multi`
```
ff_encode_multi(
    ctx: number, frame: number, pkt: number, inFrames: Frame[],
    fin?: boolean
): Promise<Packet[]>
```

Encode multiple frames into packets. Set `fin` if these are the last frames;
otherwise the arguments should be obvious. Note that it's fine to set `inFrames`
to `[]` to encode no frames, typically to set `fin`.


### `ff_free_encoder`
```
ff_free_encoder(
    c: number, frame: number, pkt: number
): Promise<void>
```

Free the things allocated by `ff_init_encoder`.


## Decoding

### `ff_init_decoder`
```
ff_init_decoder(
    name: string | number, codecpar?: number
): Promise<[number, number, number, number]>
```

Initialize a decoder. `name` can be a string name (e.g. `"libopus"`) *or* an
internal identifier. Usually, an internal identifier would come from a `Stream`
from `ff_init_demuxer_file`, in which case `codecpar` would also come from that
`Stream`.

Returns a *lot* of things, some of which aren't alwayys needed: `[codec, codec
context (c), packet (pkt), frame]`. Usually called as `[, c, pkt, frame] =
ff_init_decoder(...)`.


### `ff_decode_multi`
```
ff_decode_multi(
    ctx: number, pkt: number, frame: number, inPackets: Packet[],
    config?: boolean | {
        fin?: boolean,
        ignoreErrors?: boolean
    }
): Promise<Frame[]>
```

Decode multiple packets. `config` can be set to `true` as `fin`, which means
these are the last packets. Alternatively, `config` can be set to an object, and
`ignoreErrors` will attempt to continue decoding in the case of errors.


### `ff_free_decoder`
```
ff_free_decoder(
    c: number, pkt: number, frame: number
): Promise<void>
```

Free the things allocated by `ff_init_decoder`.


## Data manipulation

### `ff_copyout_frame`
```
ff_copyout_frame(frame: number): Promise<Frame>
```

Copy a frame out of internal libav memory (`frame`) as a libav.js object.


### `ff_copyin_frame`
```
ff_copyin_frame(framePtr: number, frame: Frame): Promise<void>
```

Copy a libav.js Frame object (`frame`) into libav memory (`framePtr`).


# AVFilter

### `ff_init_filter_graph`
```
ff_init_filter_graph(
    filters_descr: string,
    input: FilterIOSettings | FilterIOSettings[],
    output: FilterIOSettings | FilterIOSettings[]
): Promise<[number, number | number[], number | number[]]>;
```

Create a filter graph. Most of the context is `filters_descr` is either a simple
description (as would be passed to `-vf` or `-af` in ffmpeg) or a complex
description (as would be passed to `-filter_complex`).

`FilterIOSettings` describes things like the sample rate/frame rate and sample
format/pixel format. A filter graph can have multiple inputs and multiple
outputs, in which case `input` and `output` can be arrays.

If there is one input, the input pad is named `in`. Otherwise, the input pads
are named `in0`, `in1`, etc. If there is one output, the output pad is named
`out`. Otherwise, the output pads are named `out0`, `out1`, etc.

Returns `[filter graph, source context(s), sink context(s)]`. If there are
multiple inputs (sources), then source contexts is an array, and if there are
multiple outputs (sinks), then sink contexts is an array.


### `ff_filter_multi`
```
ff_filter_multi(
    srcs: number | number[], buffersink_ctx: number, framePtr: number,
    inFrames: Frame[] | Frame[][], fin?: boolean
): Promise<Frame[]>;
```

Filter one or more frames. Takes one or more source contexts (`srcs`), but *only
one sink context* (`buffersink_ctx`). If you need to filter with multiple
outputs, you need to use the lower-level libav functions. `inFrames` should be
an array of frames if there's only one source, or an array of arrays if there
are multiple sources.

Also requires a frame pointer (`framePtr`) to use for temporary storage, which
can be allocated directly or by an encoding/decoding metafunction. Set `fin` if
these are the last input frames.


# Filesystem

The `readFile`, `writeFile`, `unlink`, and `mkdev` functions are provided
directly from Emscripten's filesystem module. In addition, functions to create
streaming devices are provided. These are further documented in [IO.md](IO.md).

## Reader device

### `mkreaderdev`
```
mkreaderdev(name: string, mode?: number): Promise<void>
```

Make a reader device. This is used to stream data, and acts like a Unix
character device. The mode is usually unnecessary.


### `mkblockreaderdev`
```
mkblockreaderdev(name: string, size: number): Promise<void>
```

Similar to `mkreaderdev`, but `mkreaderdev` creates a character device
(streaming device), whereas `mkblockreaderdev` creates a block device, so it
will have a size and random access.

To intercept read requests from the block reader device(s), you must set
`libav.onblockread` to a function `(name: string, position: number, length:
number) => void`.

Because `onblockread` is a callback, it is usually possible to create a block
reader device and its callback and then use the API as if no devices are used.


### `ff_reader_dev_send`
```
ff_reader_dev_send(name: string, data: Uint8Array): Promise<void>
```

Send data to a reader device. There is no limit imposed by libav.js to how much
data a reader device can buffer.


### `ff_block_reader_dev_send`
```
ff_block_reader_dev_send(
    name: string, position: number, data: Uint8Array
): Promise<void>
```

Similar to `ff_reader_dev_send`, but for block reader devices, and has a
position specified for the data.


### `ff_reader_dev_waiting`
```
ff_reader_dev_waiting(): Promise<boolean>
```

Returns `true` if one or more reader or block reader devices are waiting for
data. Typically, this is used along with `ff_init_demuxer_file` and
`ff_read_multi` to feed in data. If instead of awaiting those promises, you
store the promises aside, you can loop with `while (await
libav.ff_reader_dev_waiting())` and send data, *then* await the file-reading
promise. In this way, you can control the transfer of input data without having
to send entire files or predict how much data might be needed.


## Writer device

### `mkwriterdev`
```
mkwriterdev(name: string, mode?: number): Promise<void>
```

Make a writer device. This is generally used to stream data, but some formats
aren't streamable, so this acts a bit more like a Unix *block* device.

To receive data from the writer device(s), you must set `libav.onwrite` to a
function `(name: string, position: number, buffer: Uint8Array) => void`.


### `mkstreamwriterdev`
```
mkstreamwriterdev(name: string, mode? number): Promise<void>
```

Make a stream writer device. Identical to a writer device except that seeking
is not allowed, so libav treats it like a stream. Most formats either don't
care or simply won't work with a stream, but certain formats (like `wav` and
`matroska`) will behave differently if the output is a stream than if it's a
block device.

Receive data in the same way as with `mkwriterdev`.


# CLI

If a variant is used that employs the `cli` fragment, then the entire `ffmpeg`
and `ffprobe` CLIs are exposed, as well as the various libav interfaces.

### `ffmpeg`
```
ffmpeg(...args: (string | string[])[]): Promise<number>
```

Runs the `ffmpeg` CLI tool. `args` can be each string argument to `ffmpeg`, or
an array of strings, or any combination thereof. Returns `ffmpeg`'s exit code.

NOTE: ffmpeg 6.0 and later require threads for the ffmpeg CLI. libav.js *does*
support the ffmpeg CLI on unthreaded environments, but to do so, it uses an
earlier version of the CLI, from 5.1.3. The libraries are still modern, and if
running libav.js in threaded mode, the ffmpeg CLI is modern as well. As time
passes, these two versions will drift apart, so make sure you know whether
you're running in threaded mode or not!


### `ffprobe`
```
ffprobe(...args: (string | string[])[]): Promise<number>
```

Like `ffmpeg`, but for the `ffprobe` tool.
